whether modified by metaphysical abstraction or not, to the dominion
of  laws,  the  regularity  of  the  latter  contrasts  so  strongly  with  the
instability of the former, as to present an appearance of fatality, which
nothing but a very careful examination of the real character of scientific
truth can dissipate. And the error is the more likely  to occur from the
fact that our first types of natural laws are derived from the phenomena
of  the  heavenly  bodies.  These, being  wholly  beyond  our  interferenc,
always  suggest  the  notion  of  absolute  necessity,  a  notion  which  it  is
difficult to prevent from extending to more complex phenimena, as soon
as they are brought within the reach of the Positive method. And it is
quite true that Positivism holds the Order of Nature to be in its primary
aspects  strictly  inveriable.  All  variations,  whether  spontaneous  or
artifical, are only transient and of secondary import. The conception of
unlimited variations would in fact be equivalent to the rejection of Law
altogether. But while this accounts for the fact that every new Positive
theory is accused of Fatalism, it is equally clear that blind persistence in
the  accusation  shows  a  very  shallow  conception  of  what  Positivism
really is. For, unchangeable as the Order of Nature is in its main aspects,
yet all phenomena,except those of Astronomy, admit of being modified
in  their  secondary  relations,  and  this  the  more  as  they  are  more
complicated.  The  Positive  spirit,  when  confined  to  the  subjects  of
Mathematics and Astronomy, was inevitably fatalist; but this ceased to
be the case when it extended to Physics and Chemistry, and especially to
Biology, where60 the margin of variation is very considerable. Now that
it embraces Social phenomena, the reproach, however it may have been
once deserved, should be heard no longer, since these phenomena, which
will for the future from its principal field,admit of longer modification
then any other, and that chiefly by our own intervention. It is obvious
then that Positivism, far from encouraging indolence, stimulates us to
action,  especially  to  social  action,  far  more  energetically  than  any
theological doctrine. It removes all groundless scruples, and prevents us
from having recourse to chimeras. It encourages our efforts everywhere,
except where they are manifestly useless.

