important of political questions. Thus the antagonism of Positivism to
Materialism  rests  upon  political  no  less  than  upon  philosophical
grounds.
With the view of securig a dispassionate consideration of this
subject, and of avoding all confusion, I have laid no stress upon the
charge of immorality that is so often brought against Materialism. The
reproach,   even   when   made   sincerely,   is   constantly   belied   by
experience,58 indeed it is inconsistent with all other we know of human
nature. Our opinios, whether right or wrong, have not, fortunately, the
absolute  power  over  our  feelings  and  conduct  which  is  commonely
attributed to them. Materialism has been provisionally connected with
the whole movement of emancipation, and it has therefore often been
found  in  common  with  the  noblest  aspirations.  That  connexion,
however, has now ceased; and it must be owned that even in the most
favourable cases their error, purely intelletual though it be, has to a
certain extent always checked the free play of our nobler instincts, by
leading men to ignore or misconceive  moral phenomena, which were left
unexplained by its crude hypothesis. Cabanis gave a striking example of
this  tendency  in  his  unfortunate  attack  upon  mediaeval  chivalry.3
Cabanis  was  a  philosopher  whose  moral  nature  was  as  pure  and
sympathetic  as  his  intellect  was  elevated  and  enlarged.  Yet  the
materialism of his day had entirely blinded him to the beneficial results
of the attempts made by the most energetic of our ancestors to institute
the Worship of Women.
We have now examined the two principal charges brought against
the Positive system, and we have found that they apply merely to the
unsystematic state in which Positive principles are first introduced. But
the system is also accused of Fatalism and of Opitimism; charges on
which it will not be necessary to dwell al great length, because,though
frequency made, they are not difficult to refute.
Nor is Positivism fatalist, since it asserts the External Order to be
modifiable
The charge of Fatalism has accompained every fresh extension of
Positive59 science, from its first beginnings. Nor is this surprising; for
when any series of phenomena passes from the domonion of Wills,