The  charge  of  Optimism  applies  to  Theology  rather  than  to
Positivism. The positivist judges of all historical actions relatively, but
does not justify them indiscriminately
For the charge of Optimsim there is even less ground than for that
of Fatalism. The latter was, to a certain extent, connected with the rise of
the Positive spirit; but Optimism is simply a result of Theology; and its
influence has always been decreasing with the growth of Positivism.
Astronomical laws, it is true, suggest the idea of prefection as naturally
as that of necessity. On the other hand, their great simplicity places the
defects of the Order of Nature in so clear a light, that optimists would
never have sought their arguments in astronomy, were it not that the first
elements of the science had to be worked out under the influence of
Monotheism,  a  system  which  involved  the  hypothesis  of  absolute
wisdom.  But  by  the  theory  of  development  on  which  the  Positive
synthesis  is  here  made  to  rest,  Optimism  is  discarded  as  well  as
Fatalism, in the direct proportion of the intricacy of the phenomena. It is
in the most intricate that the defects of Nature, as well as the power of
modifying  them,  become  most  manifest.  With  regard,  therefore,61  to
social  phenomena,  the  most  complex  of  all,  both  charges are  utterly
misplaced. Any optimistic tendencies that writers on social subjects may
display, must be due to the fact that their education has not been such as
to teach them the nature and conditions of the true scientific spirit. For
want of sound logical training, great misuse has been made in our own
time of a property peculiar to social phenomena. It is that we find in
them a greater amount of spontaneous wisdom than might have been
expected from their complexity. It would be a mistake, however, to
suppose this wisdom perfect. The phenomena in question are those of
intelligent beings who are always occupied in amending the defects of
their  economy.  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  they  will  show  less
imperfection than if, in a case equally complicated, the agents could
have been blind. The standard by which to judge of actions is always to
be taken relatively to the socialstate in which the action takes place.
grounds    of    justification;    otherwise    they    would    be    totally
incomprehensible, because inconsisent with the nature of the agents and